h1. cb-music-theory

h2. Install

At the shell:
<pre><code>
  # git clone git://github.com/chrisbratlien/cb-music-theory.git 
  # cd cb-music-theory
  # rake gem
  # rake install
</code></pre>

In your Ruby code:
<pre><code>
  require 'cb-music-theory'
</code></pre>

h2. Overview

Basic twelve-tone music theory including notes, note intervals, scales, chords

h3. Note

A Note has an Integer value indicating its place on the chromatic scale.  Compatible with
the <a href="http://www.harmony-central.com/MIDI/Doc/table2.html">MIDI note number chart</a>.

h3. NoteInterval

A NoteInterval is used to transform a Note into a new Note.  
(Note + Fixnum => Note)
(Note + NoteInterval => Note)

<pre><code>
  irb(main):009:0> Note.new("C")
  => #<Note:0x267a0c8 @value=60>
  irb(main):010:0> Note.new("C").name
  => "C"
  irb(main):011:0> Note.new("C") + NoteInterval.new(12)
  => #<Note:0x2677d64 @value=72>
  irb(main):012:0> Note.new("C") + NoteInterval.octave
  => #<Note:0x2678f0c @value=72>
  irb(main):013:0> (Note.new("C") + NoteInterval.octave).name
  => "C"
</code></pre>
Notice:

* NoteInterval.octave is the same as NoteInterval.new(12)
* plus_interval may also be used instead of + to chain the method calls

NoteIntervals can be added together.  
(NoteInterval + Fixnum => NoteInterval)
(NoteInterval + NoteInterval => NoteInterval)
<pre><code>
  irb(main):005:0> NoteInterval.new(5).plus_interval(NoteInterval.new(7))
  => #<NoteInterval:0x2677c10 @value=12>
  irb(main):006:0> NoteInterval.new(5) + NoteInterval.new(7)
  => #<NoteInterval:0x26781d8 @value=12>
  irb(main):007:0> NoteInterval.new(5) + 7
  => #<NoteInterval:0x2679858 @value=12>
</code></pre>

h3. Scales and Chords

Both of these classes share a superclass RootNoteWithIntervals which gives
a root Note, and an array of NoteIntervals.

As shown above, the NoteIntervals applied to the root
Note will yield the actual Notes in the Scale or Chord.
 
Often you'll just ask a Scale or Chord for its note_names.  But you still have access to the intervals, notes and
note_values too.

<pre><code>
class RootNoteWithIntervals

  def notes
    @intervals.map{|i| @root_note.plus_interval(i)}
  end

  def note_names
    self.notes.map{|n| n.name}
  end

  def note_values
    self.notes.map{|n| n.value}
  end

end

irb(main):055:0> Note.new("C").major_scale.note_names
=> ["C", "D", "E", "F", "G", "A", "B"]
irb(main):056:0> Note.new("F#").major_scale.note_names
=> ["F#", "G#", "A#", "B", "C#", "D#", "F"]
</code></pre>

h4. Degrees

Asking a Scale for a degree gives you the note at that position (1-based).  Degrees higher than 7 wrap
around the scale to the next octave.
<pre><code>
  irb(main):073:0> Note.new("C").major_scale.degree(1)
  => #<Note:0x2674e98 @value=60>
  irb(main):074:0> Note.new("C").major_scale.degree(1).name
  => "C"
  irb(main):075:0> Note.new("C").major_scale.degree(8)
  => #<Note:0x2674e84 @value=72>
  irb(main):076:0> Note.new("C").major_scale.degree(8).name
  => "C"
  irb(main):077:0> Note.new("C").major_scale.degree(9)
  => #<Note:0x2674de4 @value=74>
  irb(main):078:0> Note.new("C").major_scale.degree(9).name
  => "D"
</code></pre>

h4. Chords


I found <a href="http://www.harmony-central.com/Guitar/chord-and-theory-chart.txt">several</a> <a href="http://jmdl.com/howard/music/quick_crd_ref.html">references</a> on the Internet for selecting 
NoteIntervals for common chords.  
<pre><code>
  irb(main):001:0> Note.new("C").major_chord
  => #<Chord:0x267a834 @intervals=[#<NoteInterval:0x267a71c @value=0>, #<NoteInterval:0x267a708 @value=4>, #<NoteInterval:0x267a6f4 @value=7>], @root_note=#<Note:0x267a870 @value=60>>
  irb(main):002:0> Note.new("C").major_chord.note_names
  => ["C", "E", "G"]
  irb(main):003:0> Note.new("C").maj7_chord.note_names
  => ["C", "E", "G", "B"]
</code></pre>

h4. Chord Inversions

<pre><code>
  irb(main):001:0> Note.new("C").major_chord
  => #<Chord:0x287b408 @intervals=[#<NoteInterval:0x287b2f0 @value=0>, #<NoteInterval:0x287b2dc @value=4>, #<NoteInterval:0x287b2c8 @value=7>], @root_note=#<Note:0x287b444 @value=60>>
  irb(main):002:0> Note.new("C").major_chord.note_names
  => ["C", "E", "G"]
  irb(main):003:0> Note.new("C").major_chord.invert.note_names
  => ["E", "G", "C"]
  irb(main):004:0> Note.new("C").major_chord.invert.invert.note_names
  => ["G", "C", "E"]
  irb(main):005:0> Note.new("C").major_chord.invert.invert.invert.note_names
  => ["C", "E", "G"]
  irb(main):006:0> Note.new("C").major_chord.invert.invert.invert
  => #<Chord:0x28793c4 @intervals=[#<NoteInterval:0x287934c @value=0>, #<NoteInterval:0x2879338 @value=4>, #<NoteInterval:0x2879324 @value=7>], @root_note=#<Note:0x2879374 @value=72>>
</code></pre>


h4. Valid Chords for Scale Degrees
<pre><code>
irb(main):001:0> Note.new("C").major_scale.valid_chord_names_for_degree(1)
=> ["maj7_chord", "six_nine_chord", "add4_chord", "add2_chord", "sixth_chord", "maj11_chord", "maj_add2_chord", "maj_add9_chord", "major_chord", "sus4_chord", "maj_add4_chord", "fifth_chord", "sus2_chord", "maj9_chord", "add9_chord"]
</code></pre>
(some of these chord_names are synonyms, so there are duplicates)


h4. Harmonized Chord-Scales 

Given a Scale, you may describe a Chord to be "walked" up the scale such that
only Notes in that Scale are used.

The idea is explained well in the following <a href="http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fjDGl4GJosI">YouTube Video</a>

As in that YouTube video, I'll demonstrate by using :maj7_chord

harmonized_chord(start_degree,chord_name) => Chord
<pre><code>
  irb(main):005:0> Note.new("C").major_scale.harmonized_chord(1,:maj7_chord).note_names
  => ["C", "E", "G", "B"]
  irb(main):006:0> Note.new("C").major_scale.harmonized_chord(2,:maj7_chord).note_names
  => ["D", "F", "A", "C"]
  irb(main):007:0> Note.new("C").major_scale.harmonized_chord(3,:maj7_chord).note_names
  => ["E", "G", "B", "D"]
  irb(main):008:0> Note.new("C").major_scale.harmonized_chord(4,:maj7_chord).note_names
  => ["F", "A", "C", "E"]
  irb(main):009:0> Note.new("C").major_scale.harmonized_chord(5,:maj7_chord).note_names
  => ["G", "B", "D", "F"]
</code></pre>

Or do it all at once:

all_harmonized_chords(chord_name) => array of Chords
<pre><code>
  irb(main):003:0> Note.new("C").major_scale.all_harmonized_chords(:maj7_chord).map{|c| c.note_names}
  => [["C", "E", "G", "B"], ["D", "F", "A", "C"], ["E", "G", "B", "D"], ["F", "A", "C", "E"], ["G", "B", "D", "F"], ["A", "C", "E", "G"], ["B", "D", "F", "A"]]
</code></pre>

Or, to get the MIDI note numbers instead of the note names
<pre><code>
  irb(main):004:0> Note.new("C").major_scale.all_harmonized_chords(:maj7_chord).map{|c| c.note_values}
  => [[60, 64, 67, 71], [62, 65, 69, 72], [64, 67, 71, 74], [65, 69, 72, 76], [67, 71, 74, 77], [69, 72, 76, 79], [71, 74, 77, 81]] 
</code></pre>

Or, get your Phryg on
<pre><code>  
  irb(main):017:0> Note.new("C").phrygian_scale.all_harmonized_chords(:min7_chord).map{|c| c.note_names}
  => [["C", "D#", "G", "A#"], ["C#", "F", "G#", "C"], ["D#", "G", "A#", "C#"], ["F", "G#", "C", "D#"], ["G", "A#", "C#", "F"], ["G#", "C", "D#", "G"], ["A#", "C#", "F", "G#"]]
  irb(main):018:0>  
</code></pre>
